Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lops, and
today I'm joined by Doctor Sami Timimi. He's a
consultant child and adolescent psychiatrist. He's also an experienced
psychotherapist, and today we're going to talk about his
latest book, Searching for Normal A New Approach to
Understanding Mental Health. So Doctor Tamimi, welcome to the
show. It's a huge pleasure to everyone.
Thank you so much for inviting me. I look
forward to our conversation.
Yeah, likewise. So, uh, tell us first, uh, what
would you say is the main argument of your
book before we get into specifics
here? I am arguing that the way we imagine
mental health to be is a set of mythologies
that have spread around that mental distress and behavioral
difference is due to something internal to our brains
and bodies. Um, AND the, the way we understand
and the framework we make to understanding what we
mean by mental health has very powerful effects on
the people who get these labels. So that's my
first um argument uh is uh and in effect
what we're calling mental health because it's subjectively defined.
There is a. Way of thinking about mental health,
which means that we literally don't know what we're
talking about when it comes to mental health, but
we act in the press, in academic papers, as
if we do. So I'm questioning some of these
foundational assumptions, and I'm questioning the effects of these
foundational assumptions. So I go on to argue that
what we call psychiatric diagnoses are not diagnoses, but
they're better understood as commercial brands. In that they
have become commodities that are sold to people. And
uh so they've become a source of profit rather
than a source of understanding what's happening in a
person. And I then speculate about why this has
grown so quickly in the last number of years.
So, in the second half, or rather the, the
last third of the book, I'm looking at the
potential political, economic drivers of what, of the creation
of what I call a mental health industrial complex.
And a mental health industrial complex that has merged
with a strand in politics, which we often refer
to as identity politics. And I point out the
fact that this may reflect a decline in the
Western psychiatric uh sorry, in the Western capitalist empire.
So that there are socioeconomic routes to this spread
of a mental health industrial complex, which has two
sides to it. One, we've got a population that
are increasingly pessimistic, that feel society is broken. And
that don't believe that politicians have any um way
of addressing those declines. So it's a price, a
crisis of economy, but also a crisis of legitimacy.
And this, so this results in a large degree
of alienation, insecurity, and general distress in the population.
And this then becomes a new source of profit.
So rather than this turning into opportunities for social
solidarity. And the types of structural changes that may
make a difference. Instead, these are being encouraged to
be internalized as problems within a person and for
them to seek their solution and to seek a
sense of liberation, if you like, through labels and
various products associated with these psychiatric labels.
OK, so lots of things to unpack there and
of course we're going to make connections as you
mentioned there with politics, economics, I think anthropology as
well, but uh let's start with your critique of
uh of how psychiatry and clinical psychology approach mental
health today. So first of all, when are experiences
symptoms?
That's a really good question because um What uh
what has happened in our mental health ideology is.
That what we have as individuals, as people trying
to make sense of our world is we have
experiences, we have behaviors, and we're always trying to
make sense of these. One thing that we have
in common with each other is that we're essentially
meaning making creatures. We, we want to understand, we
want to understand the world. Around us for um
not just our physical needs, but also our um
sense of. What we, where we fit in, what's
going on around us, kind of these more existential.
Uh, MENTAL needs. So we try to make sense
of our, our circumstances and particularly when we're suffering
or when we're distressed, when things don't feel right
in our, in our worlds, that's when we're really
trying to find ways to make sense of things.
Yeah. When we call these experiences of distress or
feelings of not fitting in or feelings that things
are not going right, when we start calling these
symptoms. We've provided a framework for that making sense
efforts. But that framework has consequences. So one thing
I try to point out is that in our
attempts to make sense of things, the framework we
choose to make sense of what's happening. Has a
huge impact on us and how we feel and
how we um decide to um tackle those experiences
that we're having. So when we start calling experiences
symptoms. We are into a framework where we're thinking
that these uh cos what are symptoms in medical
terms, symptoms are generally referred to things that are,
we're experiencing that are due to some sort of
medical problem. In other words, there's something wrong with
you. Um, AND in that medical framework, what we
do with symptoms is we try to manage them,
get rid of them, hopefully, or reduce them. That
becomes the aim of an intervention in medical terms.
So if you have a cough, you go to
your doctor, you're hoping that the doctor will, you
know, examine you, find out, um, maybe run some
tests because you want to find out the cause
of that cough because that will affect the treatment.
And in the treatment, you're trying to get rid
of the cough, you're trying to understand what, what's
going on with the cough so that you can
treat that, that as a symptom, so a cough
becomes a symptom, so that's what we do. In
general medicine, when we start calling experiences of distress,
of anxiety, of um, Impulsivity or whatever it is,
when we start calling these general subjective experiences symptoms,
we've put it into a certain framework. Now, um
There are situations where these experiences can be symptoms.
So there are certain conditions in medicine, for example,
hypothyroidism slows your metabolism up and you're much more
likely to feel um to have a low mood.
In that case, low mood could be a symptom.
Yes. But we've put a whole range of experiences
into this bucket full of what we're calling symptoms.
And a whole range of human experiences where there
isn't a pathology that you can, you know, in
the brains or the body of the person that
you can identify. Um, AND when we start doing
that, we're, uh, potentially turning. Other ways of understanding
these experiences. We're turning um lots of experiences into
something that is a bit like meaningless torture. So
if you're very distressed and you start to think
that this is the caused by some sort of
medical problem in your brain. And you have no
other way of making sense of it or actually
being able to. Um, HAVE a sense of agency,
in, in other words, a sense that you can
be part of trying to understand that, deal with
that. With the help of other people or you
know, making sense of things that have happened in
your life, then it becomes meaningless torture, rather than
something that you can get other meanings from. And
also it uh it has the potential to deprive
you of um so you, you in, in some
ways you start passing on that distress for a
professional to deal with. You're, you're selling your emotional
life to a professional, uh and so it. It
can and often does set up a pathway towards
a part of yourself. That you now feel is
something that shouldn't be there, something that you need
to manage, something that you need to suppress. And
if whatever intervention you get doesn't do that. You
start to feel that this bit is more and
more powerful and the one thing that, the other
thing that can make it even more powerful is
that if you go to a professional, um maybe
they prescribe medication, whatever. And it does improve things,
but it keeps coming back. That uh that can
convince you even more that there is this part
of you that you are sicker than you thought
you were, that there is uh this is a
bigger problem in your life. And I see this
quite often nowadays, um, you then start collecting more
labels, more medications, more interventions, both psychological or pharmacological
or other types of interventions. Meanwhile, you're strengthening this
idea, uh, each step along the way, when things
don't improve or things improve and come back again,
you're strengthening this idea that there's a part of
you that's more and more powerful. So the framework
we choose to make sense of our experiences has
incredibly powerful effects on our experiences. This is why
I say that in, in my line of work
as a psychiatrist. We're not dealing with emotions, we're
dealing with what I call meta-emotions. We're dealing with
what framework are we going to choose to make
sense of someone's experiences, because the framework we choose.
It's going to have very powerful effects. And so
getting back to your original questions, when do we
know if something and experiences symptoms. When it comes
to mental health, we don't. This is why I
say we have models. With consequences. The idea that
we're going to get to a truth is not
part of the sorts of areas of work that
professionals like myself are involved in. We are, we,
we cannot find a truth. What we are offering
is different ways of making sense of experiences, and
we always need to be aware in the back
of our minds. That the models that we're choosing,
that we're creating with the people we work with,
they have consequences, so choose carefully.
So let me ask you now because then I
want to ask you about uh your approach and
what you think about mental illness, but how do
we arrive at an understanding of normal? I mean,
how do we determine what's normal and what do
we mean by that?
We can't. Um, I, I know that's the title
of my book, Searching for Normal. It is, it
is the, the key word is searching. Mhm. In
other words, um, at the end of the book,
I, I, I, um, quote this saying that up
close no one is normal. This is, this is
part of, part of what I'm trying to help
people understand. That how we understand normal is very
culturally and socially determined. It relates to what model
of human nature do we hold. Where does that
come from? Um, WHAT model of self do we
hold? Where does that come from? These are all
things that are, if you like, socially constructed. They
relate to what's going on in our society, which
relates to various things, historical, economic, um, political, uh,
it can relate also to religious ideas. So we
construct an idea, and so what I'm trying to
suggest in the book is the way we're constructing
our idea of normal. In recent years, and this
reflects a deterioration in the state of our economy
and in the state of uh and in the
amount of distress and also the amount of alienation
and lack of meaning that people have in their
lives cos um. We have developed a what I
refer to as a hyper-individualistic model of human beings.
So, our, our concept of what we imagine to
be normal is, has got narrower and narrower and
narrower. Which is why in the book, I, um,
in clinical practice, which I explain in the book,
I prefer not to use the concept of normal,
I prefer to use the concept of ordinary. And
or understandable. Um, uh. And I and I, I
put. I assume the people who walk in the
door in my clinical practice. They will, their experiences
will fit into what I consider to be ordinary
and or understandable until proven otherwise. That's my starting
point assumption about um So for example, one way
of thinking about that is that as human beings.
We're built, when bad things happen to us, we
feel bad. So you take that as a starting
point. Now you might not necessarily understand how that
all links together, but you start with people feeling
bad. Most likely uh way of helping people understand
that. Is because bad things have happened and most
of my clinics, and I suspect most mental health
professionals' clinics tend to have more people who've had
bad things happen in their life. Um, Um, ANOTHER
way of, uh, of understanding thinking in that way,
that, um, type of model is, um. When bad
things happened in your childhood. Is that has another
sort of impact on you. Because as you're growing
up, you don't have a sense of um that
is your normal, that is your ordinary, whatever's happening
to you. So you might not think of it
in, in those ways. But it might have done
things like um and again I see this quite
often, um is that it makes trusting adults, trusting
people around you, much harder. So a lot of
the people who walk in. To my clinic doors
have real problems with trust. They wanna be close
to people, they get close to people, they, they
um don't have trust that this is going to
work out. So there are uh the, the model
that we choose. Again, has really important consequences on
how we understand and how we work then therapeutically.
So again, just coming back to your original question.
Normal is a construct. And there are a lot
of things that um contribute to that construct and
how uh and a lot of it relates to
how we conceptualize. What human nature is, and that
conceptualization of human nature is there isn't a natural
state that this is human nature and this is
not. That conceptualization of human nature is very dependent
on your culture, on your society, and um on
the economic system. And um that's how we construct
our idea of normal, so the, so I'm also
questioning. How we think about what we consider to
be normal.
So you said that when a patient walks into
your clinic, uh, you assume that whatever they're going
to uh manifest is uh ordinary or. Understandable. I
mean, when is it that you consider it to
not be ordinary or understandable, and would you use
a label like mental illness uh to attach to
that?
I, so I've been In um psychiatry since 1989.
I've been a consultant child and adolescents. I started
in child, my first job in child and adolescent
psychiatry was 1992. And I've been a consultant since
1997, so I have many decades of experience. I've
been inpatient, outpatient. Worked with learning difficulties, etc. Um,
AND, uh, I have to say that even in
the, so I've seen the full range of severity
of presentations and even in the most severe presentations,
I haven't, I very rarely come across people who
I don't think can fit into that category. I,
I, I do, um, I do think it is
important to screen for physical conditions because there are
times when certain experiences can be, um, at least
in part a manifestation or related to physical, um,
conditions, and I have picked up. Certain physical conditions
in uh some people um uh over the years,
so that's one area where you can say, OK,
this is likely to have been a contributor. Very
rarely the full story either, but it's likely to
have been a contributor. Um, The one condition or
presentation that is um makes it much harder to
stick in that area is when people are uh
what we refer to as thought disordered. So when
it becomes really hard to have any conversation that
at least in some way makes sense. Um, uh.
And, and there are, there are degrees, but they
tend to be a lot more difficult to um
manage without going down the pathway of, for example,
using some sort of medication for a period of
time. Um, AND there's a lot of reasons why
people might end up in, in such a confused
state that they're no longer able to make sense.
Their, their connection with the world has, has, um,
really been disrupted. But even a lot of people
who present with uh what phenomenologically we refer to
as psychotic experiences, like um hearing auditory hallucinations, what
we call, so you're, you're, you perceive that you're
hearing voices externally, but there is no voices externally,
so it's a. A perceptual um problem. Or people
who have delusions. Or what we consider to be
delusions, they often have a, a um. They often
have a, a meaning behind them. So, um, er,
even people who are presenting like that. You can
still, uh, quite often, and I've, I've worked successfully
with people who present in that way without needing
to use medication or just using medication for very
short periods. And when we do use medication, my
uh my um approach to it is to um
understand that med medication is never the treatment. It
is an adjunct, so it might create a window
of opportunity, it might allow the person to become,
cos they're often very highly aroused to become less
aroused, and that might make a possibility to um
discuss certain things or look at work on certain
things. Um, And uh I've found over the years
this is the best way of managing risk. Is
having a therapeutic alliance, is taking people seriously, is
not just looking at the, in psychiatry, you're meant
to look at the form and the content is
not as important. Well, I think they both are,
you know, people's content, their delusions often ref reflect
something. Um, But you do from time to time
have to take a step back and say. This
situation is too risky to manage in the community.
Um, But over the years I've observed that the
people that I've been seeing. I, I, for, for
a while I managed an inpatient unit. For about
5 years, um. And um we developed a process
where we would um go and before we agreed
to admission of person, we had an emergency admission
line, but there were lots of referrals made for
arranged admissions and we had a process where we
had a team that would go out, a couple
of people, 2 or 3 people would go out
and interview the family and then I would see
them and they would, uh, and. We tried to
do our best to help people not come in,
and we followed them up, so we were doing
a lot of this. And during my time as
a consultant psychiatrist, the, um, at some point, the
head of the trust, because the way that we
work in the UK we're now divided into what's
called mental health trusts. So each county tends to
have a mental health trust. And they're almost set
up as a bit like um a, a private
business in that the Mental Health Trust has a
budget, it gets allocated a budget for certain things
that it provides. And at one point the. The
chief executive of our trust came to visit me
and said. Um, HOW come you have so few
patients? You know, if you carry on like this,
we're going to have to close this down. Is
this what you want? So anyway, eventually I, I
was moved on from there. And um the unit
just started being full again. So we had 12
beds and at times we were down to 3
or 4 patients, so we did a really good
job in not needing to um. Uh, HAVE patients
in, and that has carried on in my outpatient
work. There's very few times where I end up.
Um, NEEDING or wanting to refer somebody in for
inpatient treatment, but that doesn't mean that you shouldn't.
There are times where, um, that becomes, uh, necessary.
But even when it does become necessary, um. It's
important from my point of view, not to see
that as a confirmation. It's just that it's a
particular time, so I've seen so many people who've
been in and out of um inpatient units, and
I've kept the idea alive that, OK, maybe not
yet, but at some point things are gonna make
sense to you, the penny is gonna drop. I
don't know how it will come, I don't know
when it will come, I don't know what the
thing that will, but my experience is that at
some point something will start to make sense. And
all the things we've been talking about. Will start
to make sense. And you'll start to recover. So
I've seen people who've been really disabled, functioning, hardly
functioning at all. Who've made incredible recoveries after several
years of in and out, um, and you just
don't know when that will happen, but it is
important to keep that hope alive. So, um, there,
my clinical experience kind of matches this idea that.
The framework you choose. Don't lose sight of it,
even when people are really um functionally impaired. Maybe
needing the safety of an inpatient unit. It's, it's
never the final word. It's not a confirmation that
there's something broken in their brain. I see very
few people where I could say that's the case.
Uh, I would like to ask you, what is
your opinion on the fact that people nowadays or
many more people are receiving mental disorder diagnosis. I
mean, because, uh, many people say that, uh, the
reason why, for example, today people get more ADHD,
autism, depression, anxiety diagnosis is that Uh, we now
have a better understanding of what those conditions are
because, for example, in the past, uh, some of
the behaviors that resulted from that might have been
considered just, uh, moral failings or people being, I
don't know, possessed by demons or something like that.
Uh, AND, and now we have better, and they
say that we have better diagnostic. Tools, better diagnostic
procedures, better diagnostic criteria, and we have studied those
conditions more and have a and have a better
understanding of what they are and how they work.
Um, WHAT is your opinion about that? Do you
think they're right or do you think that there
are perhaps some issues with how those conditions are
diagnosed?
No, they're not right, um, and yes there are
major, major issues. Let's take one example. Um, So
there has been a massive increase in the numbers
of people getting uh attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, ADHD
diagnoses. There's been a massive increase in the number
of people getting autism diagnoses. Um, So if I
just deal with those examples, and the other thing
in child and adolescent mental health is um a
massive increase in the number of people getting depression
diagnoses in childhood, which they didn't used to get.
So what's happening is what I call a mutation
of constructs. So, um, take something like, um, ADHD.
When I first started practicing. And back in 1992,
there was that that wasn't even a concept. In
the UK Um, there was a concept of hyperkinetic
disorder which focused on activity levels, you know, uh,
how, how active children were. It was considered extremely
rare. It was considered that if you had learning
difficulties, that would automatically exclude you. Um, BECAUSE that
was considered to be sufficient explanation. And um it
was, uh, therefore something that was not really. Part
of the way of thinking and part of the
things that we looked for when we saw children
and young people. By the way, I kind of
consider myself a traditional child and adolescent psychiatrist because
in that first um posting. Uh, THE department I
worked in was mainly systemic in the way it
thought, so always thought about what's going on around
the child and also developmental. Always thought about the
idea that children change, in fact we change throughout
our lives, and those are two principles that are
very important to me. The idea, think about the
context and keep in mind that change is the
one constant. Anyway, so, um, hyperkinetic disorder. I, I
didn't see anybody with that diagnosis in my first
few years, it just wasn't a thing. Then in
um in, I think it was 1995 or 1996,
I was at a placement, uh, so I was
being uh a trainee in child psychiatry by that
point and the consultant who was um my supervisor
wanted to do some research on ADHD. It was
just coming in as a concept. And he asked
me if I would like to join him. One
of the reasons we were in a part of
East London, which had a large ethnic minority community,
and the children from this ethnic minority community, there
were large numbers of them being expelled from schools
due to behavior problems. So this consultant thought, well,
I wonder if this concept of ADHD might be
useful here, might explain this. So anyway, I agreed
to do the research. I was, uh, uh, you
know, I was in my early days of um
becoming quite keen on the academic side. So I
went away to do a literature review and um
my experience of doing the literature review really enlightened
me to all sorts of problems with the. Um,
SCIENTIFIC basis of this concept of ADHD. And it
really took me on a path to then start
questioning all sorts of other concepts. The advantage of
studying ADHD at that time is that it was
a new concept. So, I was, uh, rather than
a concept that you'd inherited and, you know, didn't
really have the time to go and look at
where does it come from, what, what's the arguments.
Here was a new concept, at least to the
UK. And so looking through the literature, I had
this, um, there, there's a saying in um In
Britain. That something is a will of the wisp.
What this means is that a will of the
wisp is a type of fog, a type of
mist. Where you see something in the mist, you
think you see something, but every time you go
there, it seems to disappear, and then you see
it again, and it just keeps disappearing, a bit
like a mirage. But it's a kind of a
um. So, uh, so I had this sense, I
tried to, I was trying to, what is ADHD?
Where is it? How, how do I know? um,
AND I had this will of the wisp feeling
as I was doing this literature review because it
seemed to me ADHD was being proposed as a
concept. And it was accepted in these um literature
as a concept that was already valid. And I
kept thinking, hang on a minute. You're telling me
all these facts about prevalence, about presentation. And are
you telling me that these are just descriptions of
behavior? Is that all it is? And of course
that was, was all it is, a descriptions of
behavior. So I knew from the start, the empirical
basis had never been established. There was, uh, it
was, it's what I call upside down science. You
start with assuming something is real. And, um, and,
and they were already calling it a neurodevelopmental problem.
Well, where, where is your evidence that it's neuro?
Where is your evidence anyway? So, um, that experience
was, was very um. Uh, IT taught me a
lot. And it taught me that, you know, you
need to go back and question the basics. Don't
assume something has been shown factually to be correct
until you find the evidence. Don't do this upside
down science. Um, SO what I've seen from there,
once I've understood this, that a concept like ADHD
is simply a description of certain behaviors, calling them
symptoms is a conceptual jump. Calling it neurodevelopmental is
a conceptual jump, calling it genetic is a conceptual
jump. And it gets even worse because what happened,
I've been engaged in this literature, I've been engaged
in articles debating these things with other people, and
what tends to happen. Is You're asking critics of
the concept to prove their criticisms. But actually the
critics of the concepts, that's upside down science. COS
in science you should always assume your hypothesis isn't
true until you can show that it's true. You
shouldn't assume it's true until somebody else can show
that it's not true. That's not how science works.
Um, ALL a critic like myself needs to show
is that you haven't demonstrated genetics, you haven't demonstrated
any neuro, uh, um, basis, neurological or chemical imbalance
basis. That is um definable, characteristic, um, so you
haven't shown me why these behaviors are symptoms. That's
all I need to do is, is need to.
Explain the lack of evidence. So what's happened is
that this construct starts as a construct, as an
idea, and it just keeps, and because it's subjective,
because it's behaviors, it just keeps expanding. Um, SO,
ADHD comes into the UK. Originally it was thought
to have a prevalence of maybe about 0.5% of
children. Over the years, it's expanded and expanded. 5%
to 10% is now the generally accepted. Originally it
was still thought of as developmental, which meant that
most children are expected to grow out of it.
When you start adding in different ideas, you then
start expanding it further. So when you focus, for
example, on lack of attention. That makes it easier
to expand it into an idea of adult ADHD.
And then you change the, you, you start arguing
that when it's in adults, it presents differently to
when it's in children. So you start introducing new
things, behaviors that you now call symptoms. So it'd
be things like poor time management or um uh
being disorganized. Then it um so then it expands
to becoming a lifelong condition, not just developmental. And
then you change the construct again, so the concept
of masking comes in. And the idea of masking
is you do have the symptoms, but you don't
show them because you're very good at hiding them.
And that it's women who do this, mainly. But
when you get home, all of these things come
out in a very disorganized life and um. So
when you introduce the concept of masking, to say
actually the reason why women don't get this diagnosis
is because they're good at masking, you've expanded it
again. At no point has there been any scientific
discovery. At no point has anybody shown what the
so-called biological difference or um. Lack or chemical imbalance,
at no point has anybody shown this. So this
is why I call it a mutation of constructs.
But it has a very powerful effect on how
you then interpret what's happening in your life. And
as it's expanded, We've got into the situation where
people now identify with their so-called disorder. Um, I
wrote about er er somebody called Matilda Bosley. Who
is a journalist in Melbourne, who talked about how
TikTok helped her discover that she had ADHD. Because
the algorithm kept sending videos to her of people
with ADHD because of the types of interests she
had. So she goes and gets a diagnosis. You
know, pays, pays for somebody to do an assessment
and things have got very expensive to do that,
gets the diagnosis. And it leads to her reinterpreting
a whole lot of things in her life. Um,
SO she talks about, for example, I, the reason
why my flat was untidy, I used to think
it was because I was lazy. Now I realize
it's because I lack dopamine. So she's taken on
this idea that there's something in her brain that
meant certain bits of her life are not the
way she had hoped or she imagined. Um Uh,
AND this is where we found concepts that were
originally rare. Um, MEANT to be for children who
will often grow out of it. Um, HAVE spread
to parts of the population who are otherwise very
successful. So, um, more and more of people who
are, uh, who've been, had successful careers, who are
in the public eye, who are, um, actors or
journalists or musicians. ARE now coming out and saying
that they have this condition like ADHD or autism.
Uh, SO we've seen this, so we've seen this
expansion, and it's a mutation of constructs. There's, there's
no, no one has actually found or been able
to demonstrate that the people who get these diagnoses
have something specifically wrong or different, uh, about them
in their biology. Childhood depression is a good example
of expansion the other way around. When I was
training, childhood depression was felt to be something that
children. Young people don't get because they're not psychologically
mature enough, cognitively. And also it was felt that
if you do present in a similar way to
adults. Then uh that's usually the result of severe
trauma. That sometimes you do get that and it
was not amenable to medication, for example. The childhood
depression is an example of a successful import from
adult psychiatry. Again, you have to change the um
way, the idea that it in children it presents
differently, but it's the same condition. So in children,
the idea became that it might present as irritation,
frustration, arguments, um, the sorts of things that a
lot of adolescents do. Um, AND that it was
amenable to the same sort of treatments, so it
introduced the idea of using so-called antidepressants, which is
a marketing term, uh, in children. So, these expansions
have happened. And there are changes in constructs, they
are changes in belief system. They are not associated
with a better understanding. They are associated with a
fictional understanding. Mm,
uh, OK, so, uh, let me just be, uh,
a little bit provocative here, if I may, pro
provocative to you, both to you and to the
people who approach psychiatry in a more, um, let's
say. The mainstream way, uh, do you think that
these labels and people identifying with these labels like
depression, anxiety, ADHD, and so on, um, uh, I
mean, uh, as you mentioned that case where a
person reinterpreted her life, do you think that if
people, uh, use those labels to reinterpret their life
and create a new. NARRATIVE to make sense of
their life, it can be helpful to them in
some way.
I think it's a dangerous and cruel trap that
you might find yourself unintentionally walking into. Um, ONE
way to think about it is that um, If
you take social context out of the picture. And
turn it into something that is internal to you.
You're not creating a better understanding of the world
and uh your experiences, you're creating a fictional one.
And that fictional one might lead you in unintended
directions. And because these then act a bit like
a commodity, this is why I call psychiatric diagnoses
are better understood as brands. These brands have expanded
and expanded because they have lots of products that
are sold alongside them. And the way commodities work
is they offer you, if you consume this. In
some ways, your life is going to be better.
But commodities also come with a sense that you
need to keep consuming them. For life to be
better because most commodities have a limited lifespan. After
a while. It's not quite enough, and it's, it's
a type of um. Uh, MEANING making experience that
really lacks, if you like, um. How to uh
a a a more existentially rich or spiritual component.
It's a very narrow and thin way of making
sense of your life. So if, if you're now
thinking that there's something in you that means you're
not able to function in certain ways as society
expects, and that's because of some hard wiring, chemical
imbalance, some type of problem inside. You're going to
be vulnerable to a process which I've seen, and
it's been quite distressing that I've seen this now
happening in young people. So I've seen what tends
to happen is. You think, oh, that really helps.
Now I understand myself better. 1 year down the
line, 2 years down the line, whatever. Hm. That
doesn't quite fit anymore for all of the things
that I'm experiencing, maybe I'll have another problem. Um,
SO you go and get another diagnosis. Maybe you
start on some medication. Most of the medications are
what I call enhanced placebos. They do something to
you. And you interpret that something as, oh, they're,
they're helping me. But after a while, your brain
gets tolerant to them and you also start to
think this is not quite doing what I hoped
it would do in the long run, so you
get another medication or another diagnosis. So I've seen.
You know, 1617 year olds. Who've um come to
the clinic and they've been seen elsewhere, and they've
got a diagnosis of ADHD and then a diagnosis
of autism. And then a diagnosis of anxiety, and
then a diagnosis of PTSD. They've had various uh
therapies, they're on several different medications. Um, AND you
see this process happening with adults. Uh, SO, it's
kind of be careful what you wish for. You
enter this world. Um, AND you're entering into a
space where that process might take over before you've
realized how far it's, it's, um, sent you. Now
there might be, there are groups of people who
can, who can avoid that and still find some
value. Um, But I do think it's very, uh,
it's not good for us as a society, let
alone good for us as individuals, and all the
evidence is that mentally we're becoming more and more
unwell as societies, even as we consume more mental
health labels, more mental health products, uh, which is
not something you'd see in other branches of medicine,
you know, outcomes are getting worse even as we
consume more. That's, that's not, not a good. Um
So, I think, you know, this idea of shifting
our attention away from other systems of meaning making
that might help more with social solidarity, that might
help more link your your experience of suffering to
things that have happened to you rather than the
idea that there's something wrong or broken. And I
guess I'm particularly worried about the impact that has
on young people. We've never had a generation as
pathologized as the current generation, at least in, in
the UK. And of course, you're very suggestible in
those ages to. You know, taking on these ideas.
So if you're growing up with an idea that
there's something about you, whether you've decided it's part
of your identity or something you're trying to control,
but there's something about you that means that you're
unfit. In being able to function in the social
Situation as it is in ours. So you might
be, and I again I've seen this, you might
be unnecessarily disabling yourself before you've even had the
chance to. Grow up and find somewhere in your
life where you can function.
So let me ask you now about the influence
and the role that you think the economic systems
we live in, uh, in the book you talk
about neoliberal capitalist societies, uh, the influence that they
might have on people's lives and people's distress. I
mean, in what ways does economics and perhaps the
job market as it is and. Issues related to
poverty and lack of opportunity, what kind of impact
can that have on people's lives and why is
it, and why does it matter?
So one of the things that I felt was
important to try and explore. And of course this,
this bit is more um speculative, it's more trying
to understand a process uh and a process which
by its very nature is going to be multifaceted
and, and, and complicated. But I have to try
and answer this question. How is it that we've
developed a system. That is expanding and expanding, and
more and more people consuming these various products related
to what I call the mental health industrial complex.
And yet we have plenty of evidence that what
we're doing at the moment is not only not
working, it's associated with our societies becoming mentally sicker.
How, how can we be involved in a process
like that? So, um, in an, in an attempt
to shed light on that, one of the, uh,
uh, one of the things that I came to
the conclusion of is that there is a dual
characteristic to this. One is that distress is eminently
exploitable. And it's eminently exploitable depending on what model
of human nature is dominant. And the second one
is that we are living in societies. Uh, THAT
are in decline. And society's in decline economically, but
also in terms of politically. Tend to have a
greater degree of distress, alienation, insecurity, and I go
through some of the statistics that bear that out.
And the thing that connects both of them. Is
the model of human nature that is dominant. So
I um er our model of human nature is
not plucked out of thin air, there isn't a
model of human nature that is the definitive model
that we're all trying to live up to. Our
model of human nature emerges from the dominant narratives
and the way they're constructed in our societies. So
in the type of capitalist societies that we live
in. The model of the economy is. Centers around
competition. And um putting your interests of your company
first above broader social interests. So it's not surprising
that this is the model of human nature that
is dominant. So I call it the compare and
compete society. Where um we're, we're pushed more and
more into a hyper-individualistic model of human nature. So
our concept of the self is um the self
as an individual, a lot in more collectivist orientated
cultures, the self cannot exist without other selves. Self
is always in relation to other selves. And in
that compare and compete, there is a sense that
we're always performing. In order to get value for
ourselves, we have to perform in some way. And
it starts young, starts through the schooling system. And
even when schools are doing their best not to
create a performative culture, that is the culture that
you're living in. That's the messages you're gonna get
from all sorts of, you're in competition with each
other. And you're always in a performance. Um, And
then you grow up into a society in which
inequality is becoming more and more visible. So, um,
the gap between the richest. Who are assumed to
be the best performing in this kind of neo-Darwinian
model of human nature, um, and the poorest, and
if you have this hyper-individualistic performance-based model of human
nature. Then if you're not succeeding by the measures
that have become popular in your society, and a
lot of the measures that have become popular relate
to how financially and job wise successful you are.
Other things don't have as much value, anywhere near
as much value. So if you're not performing in,
in considered in this kind of winner and loser
system. It's quite painful. It's quite painful to feel
that you're somehow not good enough, so that feeling
of not good enough, of feeling shame, of not
being able to fit in, of imagining other people
are doing well. That kind of insecurity. Becomes very
prevalent. And this is the insecurities in which psychiatric
products offer a kind of pseudo solution. And nobody,
even the most successful people, nobody is free of
this, because if you become really successful, you're sort
of looking behind you as to who, who, who's
coming along and how can I keep performing at
this level. There's a, there's a pressure to keep
performing. And um So, this is the type of
model of human nature, um, and when the uh
the society starts struggling economically, and we've had at
least two decades now of very visible economic struggle.
Um, IT accentuates these differences, because there's going to
be more people who are not able to, um,
earn enough, uh, so rents become high. Um, Job
security um disappears, you're always at risk of losing
your job, so you become under financial pressure, you're
um under all sorts of real world pressures as
well as this kind of existential thing that I'm
not good enough going on around you. And then,
as this has gone on and on and on.
And our politicians can't solve this, and they can't
solve this because They're not the people in charge.
Our politicians are the theater in the middle. The
people in our charge are, are the, the, the
super rich layer. Uh WHAT many people refer to
as the oligarchs, these massive corporations, they own the
media, they own the big companies, uh, they can
destroy competition whenever they want. And those people have
been making lots of money. Number of billionaires has
increased, the amount of money they have, so they're
increasing at the same time as homelessness is increasing,
you know, that's, that's a kind of exaggeration of
our inequality. So this is a structural issue, and
so when you lose hope in your politicians doing
anything, this is the crisis of legitimacy that's spread
across Western countries. Um, PEOPLE become quite pessimistic, quite
negative, don't feel hope for the future. So again,
these are the sorts of things that spread that
sense of alienation, dissatisfaction, not being good enough, performance
failure, all of those sorts of feelings. And because
it's a market-based economy. This has turned out to
be a tremendous opportunity to make profit.
OK, so let me ask you then one last
question. Um, HOW do you look at the future
of psychiatry and um do you have any hope
about it and what do you think should change
in how psychiatry approaches the topics we've been talking
about? I mean, to perhaps try to evolve into
uh. I guess we could say a proper science
or a proper scientific endeavor and really help people
dealing with their problems.
Um, ALL healthcare. Involves a psychosocial dimension as well
as the technical dimension. One way to explain that
is that if you eat an apple. There's many
things you can say scientifically about the apple in
terms of how to grow it and how to
improve the yield and all sorts of things that
are very useful to farmers and people who are
sellers and, and to the purchasers and so on.
But none of that is as scientific knowledge is
going to tell me what it's like to eat
the apple. Some type of knowledge is not in
that type of framework, in, in an empirical framework.
And to my mind, this is, uh, so, and,
and that is something that's true across healthcare. Uh,
SO, particularly if you have long-term conditions, uh, if
you have, uh, the, the sorts of conditions that
present to family doctors, um, They all have a
kind of psychosocial component. Um, THERE are certain bits
of medicine where the technical component is really key,
and the psychosocial component may be a bit less
so. So for example, if you're going for a
hip operation. I'm not as concerned about the uh
bedside manner of the of the surgeon. I'm much
more concerned that the surgeon has good skills and
is using high quality materials for my hip replacement.
Um, BUT after that, the psychosocial component becomes very
important in terms of rehabilitation, uh, exercise, uh, what
sort of support do I have in that? What
sort of place am I living in, what my,
what are my resources, um, who, who's around to
help me, etc. So, And in mental health, we
really sit at that psychosocial component side of things.
The knowledge of the experiential knowledge that comes like
eating an apple, that type of knowledge that's very
personalized. Um, SO we operate in that kind of
um. What I think of as the contextual relational
aspects of healthcare. And in a proper thoroughgoing psychiatry,
that is the expertise that we could bring to
the rest of medicine. Unfortunately, psychiatry got caught up
with um what's happened a lot in the last
century is we caught up with the idea that
we're making technical progress and we're going to have
technical fixes for all of life's problems. And so
it started to promote the idea that it's just
like any other branch of medicine, we have diagnoses
and we have specific treatments for specific diagnoses, even
though the evidence has refused to back that up.
And so that's leading to this crisis of confidence
in the paradigm in psychiatry, and, and it is
because we're adopting the wrong paradigm. Uh, THE rest
of medicine struggles with medicalization issues and all sorts
of other issues that psychiatry could help with. Um,
BUT while we pretend that we're just like any
other branch of medicine. We're going to continue to
struggle in um being able to demonstrate that we
are. So, the future of psychiatry really can only
come about once we are honest with ourselves and
dispense with the paradigm that we currently operate in.
And that would mean dispensing with the idea of
individual treatments, particularly pharmacological treatments, being the main approach,
and it would dispense with the idea that what
we have are diagnoses, we don't have diagnoses. Um,
AND, um, uh, there are models out there that
have shown that you can do that. And these
models can be very successful. For example, the model
that developed out of a movement called democratic Psychiatry
in Italy. Which is a very communicate community-based, working
with other agencies. And it takes a problem-based approach
rather than a diagnostic approach. Works on building community.
So a lot of people who use the services
are also involved in social enterprises, so they run
bed and breakfasts, hotels, they run bicycle repair workshops,
they Um, so they have various things, uh, and
they work closely with the housing department to make
sure people have, um, adequate housing and so on.
Another example is the open dialogue movement in, um,
in Finland. Who have been showing great outcomes with
even with. Uh, PEOPLE presenting with psychotic phenomena, and
again they use the approach that what people are
presenting with is human experiences that are meaningful rather
than meaningless torture, as, uh, you know, as the
model that we, uh, dominantly have. So there are
models out there. What they have in common tends
to be that they view things in, in a
contextual and relational manner, and that it's uh human
experiences that you're dealing with, not diagnostic, these, uh
these fake diagnostic products. Now, how long it might
take for that to become more widespread for these
um islands of practice that you, you can find
here and there. That I don't know, because there's
a lot of money being made by peddling these
ideas that what we deal with our diagnoses and
that if you get a diagnosis, there's all sorts
of these other products that you can consume that
will make your life better, so. Um, WHILE there's
a lot of money to be made, maybe it's
gonna be difficult, but you can't keep a false
narrative going forever. So at some point it will
change. Predicting that point is going to be difficult.
Um, NOBODY predicted. That the Soviet Union would disintegrate
when it didn't. Nobody predicted that. Well, actually there
was, there was 11 person who predicted it back
in the 70s. Um, uh, Emmanuel Todd, who wrote
about it, and he's recently also written a book
about the, um, what he calls the defeat of
the West. He, he thinks the, the Western Empire.
So it might be that the Western Empire has
to sort of disintegrate before these money-making models. Uh,
ALSO, uh, come, come to pass, but at some
point it will. That's, that's. A firm prediction, it
might be in my lifetime, it might not be
in my lifetime, I don't know, but you can't
keep a paradigm that doesn't work going forever.
Good. So, um, the book is again Searching for
Normal A New Approach to Understanding Mental Health. I
will be leaving a link to it in the
description of the interview. And Doctor Tiimi, just before
we go, uh, would you like to tell people
if there are any places on the internet where
they can find you and your work?
Yeah, I have a website, um, Sammy Tamimi.co.uk, um.
I've, I've been encouraged by my um. Publishers to
make myself visible on social media. I'm, I don't
like social media, I'm not good at it, but
I do post on X and um sometimes on
Instagram, occasionally on TikTok, but I don't know what
I'm doing really, but yeah, um, those are the
main places to find me. There is a um
Portuguese um translation of the book coming out. I
don't know, it's meant to come out, I think,
by the end of the year, but I haven't
heard if it has or uh whether it's on
its way. But there should be a Portuguese uh
version coming out too.
Great. Uh, I'm looking forward to it and thank
you so much for taking the time to come
on the show. It's been a really interesting conversation.
Thank you so much. Thank you for inviting me.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights, Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at lights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mulleran, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingberrd, Arnaud Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herzognon, Michel Jonathan Labrarith, John Yardston, and Samuel
Cerri, Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloane Wilson, Yasilla Dezara Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punter DaRosmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alec Baka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov,
Zal Adrian Yei Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall, Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti, Gabriel P
Scortez or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffyani Smith,
and Wisman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno,
Luke Lovai, Georgios Theophannus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David
Williams, Dio Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw,
Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee
Junior. Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert
Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark
Kempel, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson,
Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael
Bensleyman. George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van
Goler, Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi,
Perpendicular, Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov,
Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special
thanks to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank Lucas
Stink, Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas
Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlomon Negro, Al
Nick Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and to my executive
producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie.
Thank you for all.